# Metabolism - b15
#school/Biology
- - - -
### An Introduction to Metabolism - The Energy of Life
* The living cell is a miniature chemical factory where thousands of reactions occur.
* The cell extracts energy and applies energy to perform work.
* Some organisms even convert energy to light, as in bioluminescence.
- - - -
##### an organism’s metabolism transforms matter and energy, subject to the laws of thermodynamics
* **Metabolism** is the totality of an organism’s chemical reactions.
* Metabolism is an emergent property of life that arises from interactions between molecules within the cell.
- - - -
##### organization of the chemistry of life into metabolic pathways
* A **metabolic pathway** begins with a specific molecule and ends with a product.
* Each step is catalyzed by a specific enzyme.

- - - -
* **Catabolic pathways** release energy by breaking down complex molecules into simpler compounds.
* Cellular respiration, the breakdown of glucose in the presence of oxygen, is an example of a pathway of catabolism.
* _typically uses hydrolysis_
- - - -
* **Anabolic pathways** consume energy to build complementary complex molecules from simpler ones.
* The synthesis of protein from amino acids is an example of anabolism.
* **Bioenergetics** is the study of how organisms manage their energy resources.
* _typically uses dehydration syntehsis_
- - - -
##### energy review
* Energy is the capacity to cause change.
* Energy exists in various forms, some of which can perform work.
- - - -
#### types of energy
* Kinetic energy is energy associated with motion.
* Heat (thermal energy) is kinetic energy associated with random movement of atoms or molecules.
* Potential energy is energy that amtter possesses because of its location or structure.
* Chemical energy is potential energy available for release in a chemical reaction.
* Energy can be converted from one form to another.
- - - -
* An **exergonic** reaction proceeds with a net release of free energy and is spontaneous.
* An **endergonic** reaction absorbs free energy from its surroundings and is non-spontaneous.
- - - -
##### ATP powers cellular work by coupling exergonic reactions to endergonic reactions
* A cell does three main kinds of work:
	* Chemical
	* Transport
	* Mechanical
* To do work, cells manage energy resources by **energy coupling,** the use of an exergonic process to drive an endergonic one.
* Most energy coupling in cells is mediated by ATP.

* _ATP _**_adenosine triphosphate_**_ is the cell’s energy shuttle._
* _ATP is composed of ribose (a sugar), adenine (a nitrogenous base), and three phosphate groups._

- - - -
### How ATP Performs Work
* The three types of cellular work (mechanical, transport, and chemical) are powered by the hydrolysis of ATP.
* In the cell, the energy from the exergonic reaction of ATP hydrolysis can be used to drive an exergonic reaction.
* Overall, the coupled reactions are exergonic.

* ATP drives endergonic reactions by **phosphorylation,** transferring a phosphate group to some other molecule, such as a reactant.
* The recipient molecule is now **phosphorylated.**
- - - -
##### the regeneration of ATP
* ATP is a renewable resource that is regenerated by addition of phosphate group to adenosine diphosphate (ADP).
* The energy to phosphorylate ADP  comes from catabolic reactions in the cell.
* The chemical potential energy temporarily stored in ATP drives most cellular work.
- - - -
