---
layout: post
title: b5
categories: [Biology, Notes]
---
# Lipids
#school/Biology
- - - -
### Description
* Lipids are a class of large biological molecules that do not form polymers.
	* Unifying feature of lipids is the lack of affinity to water.
* Lipids are hydrophobic because they consist mostly of hydrocarbons, which form non-polar covalent bonds.

* **NOT POLYMER**

* The most important lipids are:
	* Fats
	* Phospholipids
	* Steroids
- - - -
### Fats
* Fats are constructed from two types of smaller molecules:
	1. Glycerol
		* Glycerol is a three-carbon alcohol with a hydroxyl group attached to each carbon.
	2. Fatty acids
		* Fatty acid consists of a carboxyl group attached to a long carbon skeleton.

- - - -
##### hydrophobic
* Fats separate from water because water molecules form hydrogen bonds with each other and exclude fats.
* In a fat, three fatty acids are joined to glycerol by an ester linkage, creating a triacylglycerol, or triglyceride.


##### saturated and unsaturated fats
* Fatty acids vary in length (number of bonds), and in the locations of double bonds.
	1. Saturated fatty acids have the maximum number of hydrogen atoms possible and no double bonds.
	2. Unsaturated fatty acids have one or more double bonds.
	* Cis double bond causes bending.
	* Trans bonds tend to be more straight.

- - - -
##### solid fat vs liquid fat
* Fats made from saturated fatty acids are called saturated fats, and are solid at room temperature.
	* Most animal fats are saturated.
* Fats made from unsaturated fatty acids are called unsaturated fats or oils, and are liquid at room temperature.
	* Plant fats and fish fats are usually unsaturated.

##### dietary issues
* A diet rich in saturated fats may contribute to cardiovascular disease through plaque deposits.

	* Hydrogenation is the process of converting unsaturated fats to saturated fats by adding hydrogen.
		* Hydrogenating vegetable oils also creates unsaturated fats with trans double bonds.
		* These trans fats may contribute more than saturated fats to cardiovascular disease.
- - - -
##### function
* **The major function of fats is energy storage**
	* _9.1 calories / gram vs 4.4 calories / gram for carbs and proteins_
	* Humans and other mammals store their fat in **adipose cells.**
		* Adipose tissue also cushions vital organs and insulates the body.

- - - -
### Phospholipids
* In a phospholipid, two fatty acids and a phosphate group are attached to glycerol.
	* The two fatty acid tails are hydrophobic, but the phosphate group and its attachments form a hydrophilic head.

##### bilayer
* When phospholipids are added to water they **self-assemble into a bilayer**, with the hydrophobic tails pointing toward the interior.
	* The structure of phospholipids results in a bilayer arrangement found in cell membranes.
		* Phospholipids are the major component of all cell membranes.

### Steroids
* Steroids are lipids characterized by a carbon skeleton consisting of four fused rings.
	* **Cholesterol,** an important steroid is a component in animal cell membranes.
		* Used to derive hormones like testosterone and estrogen.
	* Although cholesterol is essential in animals, high levels in the blood may contribute to cardiovascular disease.
