---
layout: post
title: b6
categories: [Biology, Notes]
---
# Proteins 
#school/Biology
- - - -
### Description
* Proteins account for more than 50% of the dry mass of most cells.
	* Protein functions include:
		1. Structural support
		2. Transport
		3. Cellular communications
		4. Movement
		5. Defence against foreign substances
		6. Metabolic Reactions

* A protein consists of one or more polypeptides.
	* Polypeptides are _polymers built form the same set of 20 amino acids._
- - - -
##### amino acids
* Amino acids are organic molecules with carboxyl and amino groups.
	* Amino acids differ in they properties due to differing side chains, called R groups.

* 9 Essential Amino Acids:
	1. Histidine
	2. Isoleucine
	3. Leucine
	4. Lysine
	5. methionine
	6. phenylalanine
	7. Threonine
	8. Tryptophan
	9. Valine
		* Human’s cannot synthesize these. These nine come from other sources such as food.
			* We can create the other eleven.

##### nomenclature
* Dipeptide:
	* _two animo acids joined together_
* Polypeptide _ppt_:
	* _>2 amino acids joined together. Usually short: less than 20 amino acids or so_
* Protein:
	* _polypeptide chain is called a protein when it gets large (usually ~75 or more Amin acids in length)._
- - - -
### Protein Structure and Function
* A functional protein consists of one or more polypeptides twisted, folded, and coiled into unique shape.
* The sequence of amino acids determines a protein’s three-dimensional structure.
* A protein’s **structure determines the function.**

##### structure
* **Primary structure,** the sequence of animo acids in a protein, is like the order of letters in a long word.
	* Primary structure is determined by inherited genetic information.
* The coils and folds of **secondary structure** result from hydrogen bonds between repeating constituents of the polypeptide backbone.
	* Typical secondary structures are a coil called an _α helix_ and a folded structure called a _β pleated sheet._
	* **Tertiary structure** is determined by interactions between R groups, rather than interactions between backbone constituents.
	* These interactions between R groups include hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, **hydrophobic interactions**, and van Der Waals interactions.
	* Strong covalent bonds called **disulphide bridges** may reinforce the protein’s structure.
		* Disulphide bridges only form between cysteine.
			* Cysteine is the only amino acid which contains sulphur.
* **Quaternary structure** results when two or more polypeptide chains form one macromolecule.
	* Collagen is a fibrous protein consisting of three polypeptides coiled like a rope.
		* _hemoglobin is a globular protein consisting of four polypeptides: two alpha and two beta chains._

##### structure determinants
* In addition to primary structure, physical and chemical conditions can affect structure.
* Alterations in pH, salt concentration, temperature, or other environmental factors can cause a protein to unravel.
* This loss of a protein’s native structure is called denaturation.
* A denatured protein is biologically inactive.

* It is hard to determine a protein’s structure from its primary structure.
* Most proteins probably go through several states on their way to a stable structure.
* **Chaperonins** are protein molecules that assist the proper folding of other proteins.
- - - -
* The amino acid sequence of a polypeptide is programmed by a unit of inheritance called a gene.
* Genes are made fo DNA, a nucleic acid.
- - - -
* A slight change in primary structure can affect a protein’s structure and ability to function.
	* _sickle-cell disease, an inherited blood disorders, results from a single amino acid substitution in the protein hemoglobin._
